OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.

89

mand. The fadfions of Dargham and Shawer alternately expelled C H A P.

LIX.

each other from the capital and country; and the weaker side irn- k-v—-e
plored the dangerous protefflion of the sultan of Damascus or the , “

king of Jerusalem, the perpetual enemies of the se& and monarchy
of the Fatimites. By his arms and religion, the Turk was most
formiduble3 but the Frank, in an easy dire& march, could advance
from Gaza to the Nile3 while the intermediate situation of his realm
compelled the troops of Noureddin to wheel round the 'skins of
Arabia, a long and painful circuit, which exposed them to thirst,
fatigue, and t'ne burning winds of the desert. The secret zeal and
ambition of the Turkish prince aspired to reign in Egypt under the
name of the Abbaffides ; but the restoration of the suppliant Shawer
was the ostenlible motive of the first expedition3 and the success was

entrusted to the emir Shiracouh, a valiant and veteran commander.
Dargham was oppreffed and ssain ; but the ingrafflude, the jealousy,
the just apprehensions, of his more fortunate rival, soon provoked
him to invite the king of Jerusalem to deliver Egypt from his in-
solent benefaciors. To this union, the forces of Shiraeouh were un-

equal ; he relinquished the premature conquest ; and the evacuation
of Belbeis or Pelusium was the condition of his safe retreat. As the

Turks defiled before the enemy, and their general closed the rear,

with a vigilant eye, and a battle-axe in his hand, a Frank presumed

v to ask him if he were not afraid of an attack? “ It is doubtless in

“ your power to begin the attack,'' replied the intrepid emir3 ‘⁶ but
“ rest affured, that not one of my soldiers will go to paradise till
‘⁶ he has sent an infidcl to hell.” His report of the riches of the
land, the effeminacy of the natives, and the disorders of the govern-
ment‚ revived the hopes of Noureddin; the calip'n of Bagdad ap-
plauded the pious design3 and Shiracouh descended into Egypt a

second time with twelve thousand Turks and eleven thousand Arabs.

Yet his forces were still inferior to the confederate armies of the
VOL. VI. N Franks

