448

THE DECLINE AND FALL

C H A P. Turks were affaulted by the Christians3 to whom, with some reason,

LXVII.

u--v-—a they might apply the epithet of infidele. The falsehood of La-

dissaus to his word and oath, was palliated by the religion of the

times: the most perfect, or at least the most popular, excuse would
have been the success of his arms and the deliverance of the Eastern
church. But the same treaty which should have bound his con-
science, had diminished his strength. On the proclamation of the
peace, the French and German volunteers departed with indignant
murmurs : ‘the Poles were exhausted by distant wal-fare, and perhaps
disgusted with foreign command 3 and their palatines accepted the first
licence, and hastily retired to their provinces and castles. Even
Hungary was divided by faCtion, or restrained by a laudable scruple3
and the relies of the crusade that marched in the second expedition,
were reduced to an inadequate force of twenty thousand men. A

'Walachian chief, who joined the royal standard with his vaffals, pre-

sumed to remark that their numbers did not exceed the hunting re-
tinue that sometimes attended the sultan ; and the gift of two horses
of matchless speed, might admonish Ladissaus of his secret foresight
of the event. But the despot of servia, after the restoration of his
country and children, was tempted hythe promise of new realms;
and the inexperience of the king, the enthufiafin of the legate, and
the martial presumption of Huniades himself, were persuaded that
every obstacle must yield to the invincible virtue of the sword and
vthe cross. After the passage of the Danube, two roads might lead to
-Constantinople and the Hellespont; the one direct, abrupt, and dif-
ficult, through the mountains of Haemus3 the other more tedious

*and secure, over a level country, and along the shores of the Euxine;

in which their flanks‚ according to ¹ the Scythian discipline, might
always be covered by a moveable fortification of waggons. The latter
was judicioussy preferred: the Catholics marched through the plains
of Bulgaria, burning, with wanton cruelty, the churches and villages
,of the Christian natives; and their last station was at XVarna, near the

sea-

